.TH GZOCHI-METAD 8 "April 1, 2016"
.SH NAME
.Nm gzochi-metad - the gzochi meta server
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBgzochi-metad [\fR\fB\fIoptions\fR\fB]\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgzochi-metad\fR, the meta server for the gzochi massively multiplayer online
game development framework, is responsible for supporting gzochi game
application servers in a high-availability game server cluster with data and
coordination services. As its name suggests, it's a server for servers.
.P
When gzochi-metad starts, it begins listening for connections from gzochid
processes, and optionally starts a web server that reports information about the
state of the game server cluster.
.P
The \fBgzochi-metad\fR program has many options that can be specified at
startup. For a complete list of options, run this command:
.IP
shell> \fBgzochi-metad \-\-help\fR
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GZOCHI_METAD_CONF_LOCATION
If \fB$GZOCHI_METAD_CONF_LOCATION\fR is set before \fBgzochi-metad\fR is
started, its value is used as the full path to the meta server configuration
file. This variable will be overriden by a command-line argument giving the
location of the file, if present.
.SH SEE ALSO
.P
The full documentation for \fBgzochi-metad\fR is maintained as a Texinfo
manual. If the \fBinfo\fR and \fBgzochi-metad\fR programs are properly 
installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info gzochi-metad
.P
should give you access to the complete manual.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016 Julian Graham. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3
or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH AUTHOR
Julian Graham (joolean@undecidable.net)
