.TH GZOCHI-LOAD 1 "May 4, 2015"
.SH NAME
gzochi-load \- Load exported gzochi databases
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gzochi-load
[-c <conf>] [-e <engine>] [-f] <app_name or data_dir>:<db>
.br
.B gzochi-load
[-h | -v]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The gzochi-load utility reads rows of data from standard input and loads them 
into the specified gzochi game application database. 
.PP
The input to gzochi-load must be in the input format specified by the 
\fBgzochi-dump\fR utility. This format is very similar to the format used by the
dump and load tools for Berkeley DB, though gzochi-load can read the output of 
the other gzochid tools no matter what storage engine the server is built 
against.
.PP
The argument to gzochi-load is the name of a gzochi game application database 
(i.e., \fBmeta\fR, \fBoids\fR, or \fBnames\fR) into which the data should be
loaded, qualified by an application name or the path to a directory containing 
an application's databases. If gzochi-load detects that the first part of the
argument is not a directory, it assumes it must be an application name, and will
consult the server's gzochid.conf file to obtain the root of the server's
application data directory tree, which it uses to resolve the full path to the
application's database files. Whether specified as a path or an application 
name, the target directory need not already exist; gzochi-load will create it. 
The command:

.IP
gzochi-load /var/gzochid/data/mygame2:meta < meta.dump
.PP

will load the contents of the file \(dqmeta.dump\(dq into the \(dqmeta\(dq 
database in the specified directory. All three databases are necessary to fully 
reconstitute the state of a gzochi game application. For example, the commands:

.IP
gzochi-load mygame2:meta < meta.dump
.br
gzochi-load mygame2:names < names.dump
.br
gzochi-load mygame2:oids < oids.dump
.PP

...will load each of the required databases from its constituent dump file. Note
that by default gzochi-load will refuse to load data into a database that 
already exists.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-c,\ \-\-config\fR
Specify an alternate path to the gzochid.conf file.
.IP \fB\-e,\ \-\-engine\fR
Specify the name of the storage engine to use to load data into the target 
database. The format of this argument is the same as for the 
\(dqstorage.engine.dir\(dq setting in gzochid.conf: the basename of the 
module file, minus the extension. (E.g., bdb.)
.IP \fB\-f,\ \-\-force\fR
Disable the safeguards that prevent pre-existing database files from being
written to. If this flag is specified, gzochi-load will add the contents of
the dump file to the target database without truncating it. Use with care!
.IP \fB\-h,\ \-\-help\fR
Write usage information to standard error, and exit.
.IP \fB\-v,\ \-\-version\fR
Write version information to standard error, and exit.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GZOCHID_CONF_LOCATION
If \fB$GZOCHID_CONF_LOCATION\fR is set before \fBgzochi-load\fR is started, its
value is used as the full path to the server configuration file. This variable 
will be overriden by a command-line argument giving the location of the file, if
present.
.TP
.B GZOCHID_STORAGE_ENGINE_DIR
If \fB$GZOCHID_STORAGE_ENGINE_DIR\fR is set before \fBgzochi-load\fR is started,
its value is used as the base path for resolving storage engine modules. This
value takes precedence over the \(dqstorage.engine.dir\(dq setting in the server
configuration file.

.SH AUTHOR
Julian Graham (joolean@undecidable.net)
