.TH GZOCHID 8 "April 4, 2015"
.SH NAME
.Nm gzochid - the gzochi server
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBgzochid [\fR\fB\fIoptions\fR\fB]\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgzochid\fR, the server for the gzochi massively multiplayer 
online game development framework, is the main program that does the
work of hosting deployed games and exposing endpoints for client
connections.
.P
When gzochid starts, it launches the games it finds in its 
deployment directory, storing their data in its data directory; it
begins listening for client connections and routing them to game
application endpoints; and optionally starts a web server that 
reports information about the state of the game server and any
active games.
.P
The \fBgzochid\fR program has many options that can be specified at
startup. For a complete list of options, run this command:
.IP
shell> \fBgzochid \-\-help\fR
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GZOCHID_CONF_LOCATION
If \fB$GZOCHID_CONF_LOCATION\fR is set before \fBgzochid\fR is started, its 
value is used as the full path to the server configuration file. This variable 
will be overriden by a command-line argument giving the location of the file, if
present.
.SH SEE ALSO
.P
The full documentation for \fBgzochid\fR is maintained as a Texinfo
manual. If the \fBinfo\fR and \fBgzochid\fR programs are properly 
installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info gzochid
.P
should give you access to the complete manual.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2015 Julian Graham. License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3
or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH AUTHOR
Julian Graham (julian@member.fsf.org)
